---
layout: post
title:  "Design a Trapped Dipole for Length"
date:   2021-06-09 00:40:00 -0400
categories: jekyll update
---

<script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
<script id="MathJax-script" async src="/assets/js/node_modules/mathjax/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js"></script>

[TOC levels=2,4]: #

# Table of Contents
- [Design overview](#design-overview)
    - [Basic process](#basic-process)
    - [Determining inductive reactance](#determining-inductive-reactance)
    - [Another example: 10m/20m trapped and loaded dipole](#another-example-10m20m-trapped-and-loaded-dipole)
    - [Repeat for additional bands](#repeat-for-additional-bands)
- [Trap construction](#trap-construction)
    - [Measure inductance](#measure-inductance)
        - [Method A: Use LCR meter](#method-a-use-lcr-meter)
        - [Method B: Use Nano VNA](#method-b-use-nano-vna)
    - [Measure resonance](#measure-resonance)
        - [Method A: Antenna analyzer as a grid-dip meter](#method-a-antenna-analyzer-as-a-grid-dip-meter)
        - [Method B: Use ports 1 and 2 on a Nano VNA](#method-b-use-ports-1-and-2-on-a-nano-vna)
    - [Close enough resonance](#close-enough-resonance)

I have 50 feet of room for an antenna at my QTH. I've tried endfed
halfwaves, random wires and fan dipoles and for various reasons, none of
these antennas will work for my operating situation.

My bands of interest are 40/30/20 and 17m. There aren't too many
multiband antenna designs or offerings for 40m and 20m, and include WARC
bands. Being a relatively new CW operator, 30m is great to have when 20
and 40 are swamped with high-speed contesting traffic.

I've recently obtained my Extra license and while studying for the test,
realized that I had absorbed enough math to design a multiband trap
dipole for my length requirements.

## Design overview

### Basic process

To design a two-band trapped dipole, with loading on the lower band:

1. **Pick the highest band and next lowest band.**
    * For my project, this was 17m and 20m.
3. **Determine how much loading (shortening) is required for the lower
   band.**
    * Since my antenna was to be a full length on 17m, which is 85% the
      length of 20m, I wanted as little shortening as possible.
    * $${Dim_A} = \text{shortened length of dipole}$$<br />
        
        $${Dim_A} = 98\%$$
        
    * $${Dim_B} = \text{trap distance from feedpoint (on shortened antenna)}$$<br />
        * our traps will be located at the end of the inner band, 17m
        
        $${Dim_B} = \frac {\text{length of inner band}} {\text{length of
        outer band}* {Dim_A}} = \frac {17m} {20m * 0.98} \approx 87\%$$
      
    * These two values give me an inductive reactance of 250 ohms (will
      discuss
      [determining inductive reactance](#determining-inductive-reactance)
      later):
      
        $$X_L = 250Ω$$
        
4. **Calculate trap inductance, $$L$$ in Henries.**
    * Calculate inductance, in Henries given inductive reactance $$X_L$$
      and our upper frequency $$f$$. The frequency to be trapped
      (17m/18MHz in this case):
    
        $${X_L} = {2πfL}$$
    
    * Solving for L, we get:
    
        $$L = \frac {X_L} {2πf} = \frac {250Ω} {2π18.118Mhz} = 2.196μH$$
    
    * If all you wanted to do was design a single-band shortened
      antenna, you could stop here. Since we are building coils that
      will function as LC traps for the higher band, and function as
      shortening loads on the lower band, we now must add capacitors to
      these inductors to form our antenna traps.
    
5. **Calculate trap capacitance.** We will take the inductive loading
   coils and convert these into a parallel LC circuit, aka dipole traps.
    
    The formula for capacitive reactance is:
    
    $${X_C} = \frac {1} {2πfC}$$
    
    Since traps are parallel circuits, first set $${X_C}$$ equal to $${X_L}$$:
    
    $${X_L} = {X_C}$$
    
    $${2πfL} = \frac {1} {2πfC}$$
    
    $${LC} = \frac {1} {(2πf)^2}$$
    
    $$C = \frac {1} {(2πf)^2L}$$
    
    $$C = \frac {1} {(2π18.118MHz)^2.196μH} = 35.235pF$$
    
6. **Revise capacitance based on what can be sourced.** We can roll our
   own inductors from wire wound on pvc couplers, but since I do not
   want to homebrew my own high-voltage capacitors, there seem to be two
   affordable options:
    * Surplus Soviet transmitting equipment on EBay (my preference).
      These are large "ceramic" doorknob capacitors. These can be found
      by running a search for [K15Y capacitor on ebay][ebay]. I've had
      good results with 3.5kV rated doorknob capacitors.
        * 2 K15Y doorknob capacitors will cost between $5 and $10,
          before shipping.
    * Parallel silver mica capacitors. I haven't tried this, but it
      seems that 3 [$$120pF$$ 1kV silver mica capacitors][mouser] in
      series will provide a sufficient voltage rating for our antenna.
      Three of these capacitors in series will have three times the
      voltage rating and one third the capacitance of each capacitor.
        * At $1.60 each, 6 capacitors for a pair of traps will cost
          $9.60, before tax and shipping.
    * 3 $$120pF$$ capacitors in series leaves us with a trap capacitance
      of $$40pF$$, which is probably close enough.
    
        $${C_{initial}} = 35.235pF \approx {C_{sourcable}} \approx 40pF
        $$
7. **Recalculate inductance based on the sourcable capacitance.**
    
    $$L = \frac {1} {(2πf)^2C} = \frac {1} {(2π18.118MHz)^2*40pF} =
    1.929μH $$

Altogether, we have:

* \\({Dim_A} = 98\%\\)
* \\({Dim_B} = 85\%\\)
* \\(C = 40pF\\)
* \\(L = 1.929μH\\)

Our two-band 17m and 20m dipole (with very little loading on 20m) will
require two parallel circuit traps with a capacitance of \\(40pF\\) and
inductance of \\(1.929μH\\).

### Determining inductive reactance

Based on how long we want our antenna to be (how much we want to
shorten), which bands we use (which determines trap/coil placement), we
need to calculate the inductive reactance, \\(X_L\\), of our traps.

See [post on loading coil calculation methods][calc_coils].

### Another example: 10m/20m trapped and loaded dipole

Suppose we wanted trapped dipole for 20m and 10m and we wanted to
shorten the whole antenna by 25%. This would give us

* \\({Dim_A} = 75\%\\)
    * we want to shorten the antenna by 25%
* \\({Dim_B} = 66\%\\)
    * \\(20m * 0.75 = 15m\\)
    * traps will be located at the end of the 10m section:
    
        \\( {Dim_B} = \frac {\text{trap location}} {\text{length of outer band}* {Dim_A}} = \frac {10m} {20m * 0.75} = 0.\overline{66} \\)
    
* \\(X_L = 600Ω\\)
    * as per K1PLP's chart
* \\({L_{initial}} = \frac {X_L} {2πf} = \frac {600Ω} {2π28.85Mhz} = 3.310μH\\)
* \\({C_{initial}} = \frac {1} {(2πf)^2L} = \frac {1} {(2π28.85MHz)^2 3.310μH} = 9.72pF \\)
* \\({C_{sourcable}} = 10pF\\)
    * as per Ebay search for [K15Y capacitors][ebay]
* \\({L_{revised}} = \frac {1} {(2πf)^2C} = \frac {1} {(2π28.85MHz)^2 10pF} = 3.043μH\\)

For a two band antenna for 10m and 20m, with traps at the end of the 10m
dipole, functioning as loading coils for the 20m band (reducing the
overall antenna length by 25%), we will need parallel traps with 3.043μH
inductance and 10pF of capacitance.

### Repeat for additional bands

To add additional bands, take your trapped/loaded dipole and repeat this
process for the third band. However, you will determine new $${Dim_A}$$
and $${Dim_B}$$ regardless of loading for the second band. Pretend as if
the loaded second band is at full length when calculating $${Dim_A}$$
and $${Dim_B}$$.

For example, adding 30m to the 10m/20m dipole and shortening by 20%:

* \\({Dim_A}\\) would be 80%, regardless of any loading done on the 20m
  band.
* \\({Dim_B}\\) would be 83%
    * 80% of 30m is 24m
    * The second pair of traps will be located at the end of the 20m
      section
    
        \\( {Dim_B} = \frac {\text{trap location}} {\text{length of outer band}* {Dim_A}} = \frac {20m} {30m * 0.8} =  0.8\overline{3} \\)
* \\(X_L = 875Ω\\)
    * as per K1PLP's chart
* Calculate \\(L\\) and \\(C\\), repeating process above.

## Trap construction

TBA

### Measure inductance

#### Method A: Use LCR meter

#### Method B: Use Nano VNA

### Measure resonance

#### Method A: Antenna analyzer as a grid-dip meter

#### Method B: Use ports 1 and 2 on a Nano VNA

### Close enough resonance

As per W8IJ... TBA

[K1PLP]: https://dxc.wc2l.com/QST_Sep_1974_p28-34_58.pdf
[w8ij]: https://www.w8ji.com/traps.htm
[antenna_book_vol2]: https://amzn.to/2TYz4Xj
[antenna_book]: https://amzn.to/3wgernK
[mouser]: https://www.mouser.com/Passive-Components/Capacitors/Mica-Capacitors/_/N-5g97?P=1z0z7l5Z1z0x7x5Z1z0wxeo&Ns=Pricing|0
[ebay]: https://ebay.us/W5SabZ
[coil-dipole-calculator]: https://www.66pacific.com/calculators/coil-shortened-dipole-antenna-calculator.aspx
[66pacific]: https://66pacific.com
[CT1EOJ]: http://p1k.arrl.org/pubs_archive/104832
[calc_coils]: {% post_url 2021-06-11-calculate-loading-methods %}
